# Contributing

Every contribution to kubenav is welcome, whether it is reporting a bug,
submitting a fix, proposing new features or becoming a maintainer. To make
contributing to kubenav as easy as possible you will find more details for the
development flow in this documentation.

Please note we have a
[Code of Conduct](https://github.com/kubenav/kubenav/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md),
please follow it in all your interactions with the project.

- [Feedback, Issues and Questions](#feedback-issues-and-questions)
- [Adding new Features](#adding-new-features)
- [Development](#development)
  - [Working with the Go Code](#working-with-the-go-code)
  - [Working with the Flutter Code](#working-with-the-flutter-code)
    - [Add a Custom Icon](#add-a-custom-icon)
    - [Add a new Image](#add-a-new-image)
    - [Update Kubernetes Resources](#update-kubernetes-resources)
    - [Update the Icons and Splash Screen](#update-the-icons-and-splash-screen)
    - [Run Release Build on a Device](#run-release-build-on-a-device)
- [Release](#release)

## Feedback, Issues and Questions

If you encounter any issue or you have an idea to improve, please:

- Search through
  [existing open and closed GitHub Issues](https://github.com/kubenav/kubenav/issues)
  and [discussions](https://github.com/kubenav/kubenav/discussions) for the
  answer first. If you find a relevant topic, please comment on the issue.
- If none of the issues are relevant, please add an
  [issues](https://github.com/kubenav/kubenav/issues) or start a new
  [discussions](https://github.com/kubenav/kubenav/discussions). Please use the
  issue templates and provide any relevant information.

If you encounter a security vulnerability, please do not open an issue and
instead send an email to
[admin@kubenav.io](mailto:admin@kubenav.io?subject=[GitHub]%20Security%20Vulnerability).

## Adding new Features

When contributing a complex change to the kubenav repository, please discuss the
change you wish to make within a Github issue with the owners of this repository
before making the change.

## Development

kubenav uses [Flutter](https://flutter.dev) and [Go](https://go.dev), make sure
that you have the correct version installed before starting development. You can
use the following commands to check your installed version:

```sh
$ flutter --version

Flutter 3.38.5 • channel stable • https://github.com/flutter/flutter.git
Framework • revision f6ff1529fd (3 weeks ago) • 2025-12-11 11:50:07 -0500
Engine • hash c108a94d7a8273e112339e6c6833daa06e723a54 (revision 1527ae0ec5) (23 days ago) • 2025-12-11 15:04:31.000Z
Tools • Dart 3.10.4 • DevTools 2.51.1

$ go version

go version go1.25.5 darwin/arm64
```

### Working with the Go Code

The Go code for kubenav can be found in the `cmd` folder and we are using the
[`gomobile`](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Mobile) tools. They can be
installed by running the following two commands:

```sh
go install golang.org/x/mobile/cmd/gomobile@latest
gomobile init

go get golang.org/x/mobile/cmd/gomobile
```

To build the code via the `gomobile` command the `ANDROID_HOME` and
`ANDROID_NDK_HOME` environment variables must be set. We are using NDK Version
`27.0.12077973`.

The Android and iOS bindings can then be build using the following Make
commands:

- `make bindings-android`
- `make bindings-ios`

We are using `gofmt` to format the Go code.

### Working with the Flutter Code

In the following section we descibe how to use the Flutter code for the app.
When working with the Flutter code ensure that there are no linting errors when
you commit your code and that you have sorted all imports.

To sort all imports in the Dart code in a uniformly way you have to run the
`flutter pub run import_sorter:main` command.

#### Add a Custom Icon

If you have to add a custom icon to the Flutter app we are using
https://www.fluttericon.com. The configuration file for all existing icons can
be found at `utils/images/custom-icons/config.json`.

When you add a new custom icon place the `.svg` file in the
`utils/images/custom-icons` folder. Please also update the `config.json` file.
The content of the generated Dart class should be placed into the
`lib/utils/custom_icons.dart` file.

#### Add a new Image

To add a new image to the app, place your `.svg` file in one of the folders in
the `assets` folder. To generate the corresponding `.png` files the
`generate.sh` script can be used. The script uses
[Inkscape](https://inkscape.org) to generate the `.png` files from the `.svg`
files in all the required resolutions.

#### Update Kubernetes Resources

The Kubernetes resource can be automatically generated. In the first step we
have to get the OpenAPI schema, by running the following commands:

```sh
cd utils/schemas/
./getschema.sh
```

Afterwards the Dart code for the Kubernetes resources can be generated by
running the following commands:

```sh
dart run build_runner build -v --delete-conflicting-outputs
dart format ./lib/models/kubernetes
dart fix --apply ./lib/models/kubernetes
```

#### Update the Icons and Splash Screen

To update the icon for the app or the splash screens the following two commands
can be used:

```sh
flutter pub run flutter_launcher_icons:main
flutter pub run flutter_native_splash:create
```

The icons can be found in the `utils/images/app-icons` folder. The splash screen
icons can be found in the `utils/images/splash-screen` folder.

#### Run Debug Build on an Emulator

To list all available emulators the `flutter emulators` command can be used.
Afterwards the emulators can be started as follows:

```sh
flutter emulators --launch apple_ios_simulator
flutter emulators --launch Pixel_4_API_30
```

To run the app on a started emulator the following can be used:

```sh
flutter run -d "iPhone 15 Pro Max"
flutter run -d "sdk gphone arm64"
```

#### Run Release Build on a Device

To run the release build on a device for testing, we have to get the Device ID
first by running the following command:

```sh
$ flutter devices

3 connected devices:

Ricos iPad (mobile) • 00008027-0004785E0A31002E • ios            • iOS 16.2 20C65
macOS (desktop)     • macos                     • darwin-arm64   • macOS 13.1 22C65 darwin-arm
Chrome (web)        • chrome                    • web-javascript • Google Chrome 108.0.5359.124
```

Then we can use one of the listed devices and execute the following command to
build and run the app on this device:

```sh
flutter run --release --device-id=00008027-0004785E0A31002E
```

With the above command we can also savely quit the terminal process (by pressing
`q`) and continue testing on the device is not connected to our development
machine.

## Release

To create a new release for Android and iOS which can be published in
[Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=io.kubenav.kubenav)
and the [App Store](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/kubenav/id1494512160) the
following workflow can be used:

1. Create a file `/android/key.properties` with the following content:

   ```
   storePassword=
   keyPassword=
   keyAlias=upload
   storeFile=
   ```

2. Update the `version` key in the `pubspec.yaml` file

3. Delete the `build/` and `.dart_tool/` directories via the `flutter clean`
   command.

4. Run `make bindings-android` and `make bindings-ios` to build the Go code for
   kubenav

5. Build the app for Android by running `flutter build appbundle`. The build can
   be found at `/build/app/outputs/bundle/release/app-release.aab` and must be
   uploaded to
   [https://play.google.com/apps/publish](https://play.google.com/apps/publish)

6. Build the app for iOS by running `flutter build ipa`. The build can be found
   at `/build/ios/archive/Runner.xcarchive` and must be opened in Xcode. In
   Xcode **Validate App** and **Distribute App** can be used to upload the build
   to [https://appstoreconnect.apple.com](https://appstoreconnect.apple.com).
